--GIT COMMANDS--

git config --global user.name "FIRST_NAME LAST_NAME"- add user name 
git config --global user.email "MY_NAME@example.com" - add user email
git status - will return status 
git init - to start tracking files.
git add --a or git add . - to stage all files or changes.
git add first.txt - to stage a particular file.
git commit -m "initial commit" - to commit and add message. 
git log - will return the log along with commit and key.
rm -rf .git - it will deleted all the files and folder of git. Use it carefully.
git clone https://github.com/tensorflow/tensorflow.git Tensorflow- - will create clone of repository.
git diff - it compare working directory with staging area.
git diff --staged - it compare present staging area with last commit.
git commit -a -m "Direct commit"- This is used to directly commit skipping the staged part. It stage and creates commit for all tracked files. Untracked file will not go to commit.
git rm ""third.txt" - It will remove/delete the file and also stage the file.
git mv first.txt first_renamed.txt - It will rename the file and also stage the file.
git rm --cached first.txt - If git was tracking this file earlier and now it has been mentioned in gitignore then we need to run this command to now stop tracking this file. 
git log -p - It will show only all commits(with diff/changes) along with logs.
git log -p -n - It will show only n commits(with diff/changes) along with logs.
git log --stat - Return all commits with short summary.
git log --pretty=oneline - Show all the commits, with one commit in one line. 
git log --pretty=short - Show all the commits, with short details.
git log --pretty=full - Show all the commits, with some details.
git log --pretty=format:"%h -- %an" - %h will show hash commit in short & %an will show author name. Read git log docs for more commands. 
git log --since=2.days - Show logs for past 2 days. Likwise u can use .weeks, .months, .years
git commit --amend - This is used to merge the commits. Vim editor will get opened and you can press i for edit and then press esc and then :wq and then press enter.
git restore --staged first.txt - It will unstage the file and restore to previous status as modified.
git restore - It will restore all the files. Use it carefully. 
git checkout --first.txt - It will restore the file to previous commit. 
git checkout --f - It will restore all the files to the last commit.
git config --global alias.st status - It means status will be displayed by using coomand st (git st). Alias is used to modify commands into aliases. 
git config --global alias.unstage 'restore --staged--' - This will replace the command git restore --staged to git unstage.
git config --global alias.last 'log -p -1' - This will replace the command git log -p -1 to git last.
git revert HEAD --no-edit -  you can back out your changes by using a git revert command like the following.  
                             You can either specify the id of your commit that you can see from the previous log output
                             or use the shortcut HEAD to rollback the last commit:
                             If you don’t specify the --no-edit flag you may be presented with an editor screen showing the message with changes to be reverted.
                             In that case, press the Control (or Ctrl) key simultaneously with X.

--BRANCHING--

git checkout -b develop - It will create new branch with the name develop. It will also take u into the new branch develop.
git branch branchname - It will also create a new branch with given name.
git checkout master - It will take u into the master branch.
git checkout develop - It will take u into the develop branch.
git branch - It will show all the branches. With asterix indicating the active branch. 
git merge filename - It will merge the branched file with the master. VS code will ask to resolve the merge conflict. 
                     run git add. & then run git commit & vim editor will get open then press esc :wq and press enter. Branched file will get merged. 
                     You need to first go into the master branch to initiate merge by using git checkout command. 
git branch -v - It will show last commit by every branch. With commit hash and message.
git branch --merged - Show already merged branches.
git branch --no-merged - Show not merged branches.
git branch -d develop - Delete branch with name develop. Gives error if it is not merged.
git branch -D develop - Delete without showing error, even if it is not merged.
---before changing branch run commit so that tree should be clean.---

--GITHUB-- 

First create the repository in github. 
git remote add origin git@github.com: pranavmadhahar/learning.git (origin is the name of url, learning.git is the name of repository u have created in github)
git remote - This will show the name of url (origin)
git remote -v - This will show two url for pull (fetch) and push. 
git push -u origin master - This will push code in repository.
git push origin branchname - This will push branch in repository. Before doing that u need to run git checkout branchname. 
git push origin branchname:mybranch - This create branch by name of mybranch in remote.
git push -d origin branchname - This will delete branch in remote. 
git pull - To fetch the updated codebase and to merge it with the local repo. 
git fetch - To fetch the updated codebase for review for changes in the master without merging with the local repo. 
git diff - To comapre the changes with the origin repo. 

--TO CREATE A NEW KEY--

First go to settings and then go to SSH & GPG keys.
Add title (Pranav's Personal Computer Thinkpad)
$ ssh-keygen -t ed25519 -C "pranav.madhahar@gmail.com" - Copy & paste this code in g-bash & press enter leave the fields blank and press enter.
eval "$(ssh-agent -s)" - Copy & paste this code in g-bash & press enter. It will return e.g. agent pid 1688 
$ ssh-add ~/.ssh/id_ed25519 - Copy & paste this code in g-bash & press enter. You key is generated here.
tail ~/.ssh/id_ed25519.pub - Copy & paste this code in g-bash & press enter. To get your key.
Copy and paste your key in the github add key container and press add ssh key button.
git push -u origin master - To push your code in github repository.

---LINUX COMMANDS---

pwd - present working directory
ls - lists content 
cd - change directory
touch error.log - it will create file error.log.txt
touch .gitignore - it will create file with name .gitignore.txt, you can add file names of files you want to ignore in this file. If you want to ignore e.g all error.log files then u can add *.log. If u want ignore folder e.g dir, then u can add dir/.
if u add /dir/ in .gitnignore file, then git will only ignore outer dir folder but not if dir exists inside another folder. 
mkdir myrepo - It will create a new directory by name of myrepo.
ls -la .git - It will show the contents of the sub-directory git which houses local repos.
touch newfile - This will create an empty file by name of newfile.
echo 'Here is some text in my newfile.' >> newfile - This will add the the text in newfile mentioned in '...'
cat newfile - This will show the text in newfile. 


---CLONING---

Go the github repository and click clone button
copy the url or directly download.
Go to your laptop and open terminal go to the directory where you want to clone
Type git clone and paste the url, press enter. 

---TO BE EXPLORED---

git-format-patch
git am
git-daemon
git revert


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
