
BASIC COMMANDS 

NAVIGATION
-------------

pwd - print working directory - shows present directory user is working in, it shows the parent
ls - shows files and directories or the children inside the parent directory
ls -R - shows files inside children directories in addition to ls above. It shows all files recursively.
ls -a - shows hidden files as well.
ls -lart - It lists all files including hidden ones, in long format, sorted by modified time, in reverse order, along with permissions.
ls -l *file1* - This will matches file1 in any position and list it. e.g. file1.txt, abfile1.txt 
ls -lR file1* - This will list recursively in all subdirectories. file1* means begins with. 
/ - root directory, linux has tree like structure, windows has drive based structure e.g  C,D,E
~$ - home/user directory
cd - change directory
cd .. - change directory to parent directory
cd -  - change to the previous directory
cd ~  - change to the home directory
tab - Enter first three char and then press tab and it will auto complete the directory name e.g cd Dow+tab autocompletes Downloads


MKDIR, TOUCH, MOVE, COPY
--------------------------

mkdir - creates directory or folder e.g. mkdir pranav
touch - creates a blank file e.g touch 1.txt
touch .pr  - creates a hidden file with pr 
case sensitivity - Changing the case sensitivity with same name, several files can be created e.g. abcd.txt, ABCD.txt, abCD.txt 
mv - move a file to folder e.g mv 1.txt this/  - it will move 1.txt in this folder 
cp - copy a file to folder e.g mv 2.txt this/  - it will copy 2.txt in this folder 
absolute path - cp /home/maverick/pranav/56.txt /home/maverick  - it will copy file to the mentioned directory and same applies for mv


USERS, SUDO, APT, PATHS
--------------------------

Users - There are two kinds of users, regular user and root user or super user or admin 
        Regular user has limited rights and permissions while super user has all the access and rights even for other users with all permissions.
sudo - user with certain permissions
sudo su - super user or root user with all permissions. 
sudo apt update - This will update the list of softwares for upgrade but will not install
sudo apt-get update - Only update the existing sofware not new ones available.
sudo apt upgrade - This will check the list of softwares which can be updated and then installs the updates.
sudo apt-get upgrade - Upgrade only whats already installed on system, no new packages even if they are available. 
sudo apt install vlc - This will install the mentioned software.
apt - is the package manager for ubuntu linux. It stands for advanced package tool. It is dpkg(debian package) based.

Relative Path - cd pranav - This will take to the pranav folder in present working directory.
Absolute Path - cd /home/user - If u want to go to some other directory which is not in present working directory.

clear - clears the console.
history - will show all commands ran by user.

echo - echo pranav will print pranav.
printf - will do the same as above.


CHOWN, CHMOD, CHGRP
----------------------

owner group other - ls -l command will list all the permissions in that order. 
chmod calculator - it tells u a number based on permissions granted for read, write and execute. 
chmod - chmod 734 1.txt - it will reset the permissions for owner, group & other as per chmod calculator. 
chmod & chgrp - chmod is used to change permissions for file, and chgrp is used to change permissions for group.
chown - for file owner

top - this will show top processes which are consuming resources in decending order.
      after that press q to get the cursor.
      It can be used with several flags t, m, A, r, k, f, o

ps - shows all the processes which are running.
ps -a - shows hidden or background processes as well.
kill - kill 1234 - This will kill the process with given process id(PID)

vim - press i (insert) for start typing.
    - press esc and press :
    - press q for exiting without saving(:q)
    - press qw for saving and returning to console(:qw)
    - If u r editing in vim which already contains text and do not wish to save then press :q! after pressing esc.


BOOTING PROCESS
-----------------

1. When the power button is on it activates the BIOS (basic input output system). BIOS software is stored on rom chip on motherboard.

2. Initializes the screen and keyboard and tests memory. This process inculding one above is also known as POST. Power on self test.

3. System control is passed from BIOS to the bootloader which is part of the OS. Rest of the boot process is taken care by OS.
   Bootloader is stored in the hard drive. 

4. GRUB is grand unified bootloader for linux. ISOlinux for booting from removable media e.g usb.

5. Bootloader is responsible for loading kernel image and initial filesystem into memory.

6. init process is the parent process. It is responsible for keeping the system running and shutting it down cleanly.
   It also act as a process manager for all other processes. It is also responsible for loggin in and log out the user.

7. systemd is the newer process which is now taken over from init. init now just points to the systemd process and it takes over. 
   It starts several other processes simultaneously. 

8. systemctl is used for most basic tasks. Use case:

   1. Starting, stopping, restarting service (e.g. httpd for apache web server)
      sudo systemctl start|stop|restart httpd.service

   2. enabiling or disabling a service to start at boot
      sudo systemctl enable|disable httpd.service.


BASIC COMMANDS
----------------

A command has three elements - command -options arguments e.g ls -a /home/pranav

usb and other removable drives are available at /run/media/yourusername/disklabel
mount - this will show all the mounted devices

df -h --total - This will show disk usage with free space available.

sudo shutdown - From terminal will shutdown the computer.
sudo shutdown -h - Will halt or activate the sleep mode on computer
sudo shutdown -r - Will reboot the computer.

which - which firefox - This will return the directory where the program is located.
whereis - whereis firefox - This will look for broader options to find the program.

pushd - pushd /temp - It shows i was at home and want to go to temp directory.
popd - takes you to the previous directory in the stack visited. 
dirs - list of directories visited in the pushd & popd stack

tree -d - Will show the tree of directories


LINKS
-------

Hard Link

ln - ln file-1 file-2 - File-2 becomes link to file-1. They refer to the same data. They  have same incode.
                        There is one file but there is more than one name associated with it.
ls -li file? - Same as ls -l. It includes incode number & matches file suffix with single character because there is single ? 
               It will match fileA fileB but not fileAB 

Soft Link

ln -s file1 file3 - File3 becomes soft link to file1. File3 will refer to file1. They have separate incode number. They are symbolic links, takes no extra space.
                    Creating shortcut to directory on destop is an example of such link. 
ls -li file1 file3 - They will show separate incode number.


FILE DISPLAY
--------------

wc - This shows the basic data for the file e.g. word count, lines, characters.
cat - Displays the content of the file.
cat -n - Displays content with line no.
tac - Displays files backwards.
less - Displays one screen at a time, hit spacebar for next. 
less -N - Will also show line no's.
head - This will display only few lines from the start. head -20 will show first 20 lines.
tail - Displays few lines from the end.


MAKE, REMOVE, RENAME, MOVE
----------------------------

mkdir - creates directory - /home/media - This will create media folder/directory home directory.
rmdir - remove directory - this will remove directory, it must be empty otherwise command will fail.
rm -rf - forcefully remove a directory recursively. Should be avoided.
rm -f - forcefully remove a file.
rm -i - interactively remove a file. It will prompt before removal.
mv - move a file and for rename a file


FILE CREATION
----------------

touch - touch file1.txt - creates a new file and update timestamp in case already exists.
echo - echo > file1.txt - creates a new file in case it do not exist and overwrites a file in case already exists.


SEARCHING FILES & DIRECTORIES
-------------------------------

locate - locate bin
find - find . -name "file1" -ls 
       find . -iname "file1" , i flag here will ignore the case of the file.
       find /user -type f -name "file1" type will find only within given filetype here f is normal file, d means for directories
       find . -name d -maxdepth 1 - This will show directories excluding subfolders
       find . -size 0 -ls - This will show all the files with size 0.
       find . -type f -exec grep -H log {} \;  - This will find all regular files with log in it and returns its filename. 
updatedb - This is system generated and updated daily directory of all files. Use with sudo command to run for instant update.
grep - like a filter in msexcel. It will return the line containing the given variable. e.g grep "developer" file1.txt 
wildcards - ?  matches any single character
            * matches any string of character
           [set] e.g [a,b,c] will match any occurance of a,b,c
           [!set] matches any character not in the set of characters
du - disk usage for a file or directory. 
di -sh - summarize total size of a file/folder
df -h - Check overall disk space (free/used)


DOCUMENTATION
----------------

man - man topic less or man topic | head 7
info - info make 
help - --help man 


PROCESSES
-------------

ps - show all the processes
ps -lf - This will show processes with priority. 
kill -SIGKILL pid - to kill a process
kill -9 pid - to kill a process
RUID - Identifies user who started the process
RGID - Identifies group who started the process
EUID - Determines access rights of user
EGID - Determines access rights of group
nice - will set a new process with priority nice -n 10 python myscript.py
renice - will reset the already running process with assigned priority. renice +10 pid 
gnome-system-monitor - This will open gui for processes.
w or top or uptime - Anyone of the command will show load averages.


FILESYSTEM
-------------

/home - user directory
/bin - system binary files to boot the system.
/sbin - essential binaries related to system adminstration
/proc - sudo filesystems becuase they do not have permanent presence on the disk, These contain virtual files containing constantly changing kernel data.
/dev - contain device nodes,kind of sudo files used by harware and software devices.
/var - contains files which change in size and content as system is running
/etc - contains system configuration files, contains no binaries
/boot - contains essential files to boot the system
/lib - contain comman code shared by applications
/run - removable media can be accessed on this directory. e.g. /run/media/yourusername/disklabel
/temp - temporary files
/opt - optional application softwware packages
/sys - virtual pseudo-filesystem giving info about system and hardware, can be used for debugging and alterting system parameters.
/srv - site specific data served up by system seldom used 
/usr - multiuser applications, utilities and data.
/etc/fstab - for automatic mounting of filesystems at boot.


DIFF & PATCH
--------------

diff - diff is used to compare text files (flags c, r, i, w, q) e.g. diff -c file1 file2
cmp -  it is used to compare binaries. Same as diff.
diff3 - it is used to compare 3 files. A comman file or base file and 2 other for comparasion. e.g. diff -c file1 commanfile file2
diff -Nur originalfile newfile > patchfile
      Distributing only patch is more efficient than entire newfile. A patch will only update the changes.
patch - patch -p1 < patcchfile
        patch originalfile patchfile


BACKING UP
--------------

cp - to copy
rsync - rsync sourcefile destinationfile
        rsync --progress -avrxH --delete sourcedir destdir (this is a good combination of rsynnc command)

File compression

gzip, bzip2(more efficient than gzip), xz, zip


TEXT EDITING
----------------

echo - echo line one > file1 This will create a new file and send text to it
       echo line two >> file1 This will send text to already existing file
       echo line three >> file1

cat - cat << EOF > myfile
      > line one
      > line two
      > line three
      > EOF

nano - this will open a terminal based editor

vim - vi filename 
      vim is by default is in command mode
      press i to enter text
      esc will bring to the command line
      press : and enter wq and press enter to save
      h, j keys will navigate cursor left and right 
      w will take cursor to the beginning of next word
      $ will move the cursor to the end of line
      /pattern command will search text forward
      pattern? will search text backwards
      n key will move to next occurance of search pattern
      N key will move to previous occurance of search pattern
      type :! wc % in the file will return word count.
      :qi file will close without saving the changes

emacs - refer to emacs tutorials on net


USER MANAGEMENT
-----------------

whoami - will tell the current user 
who - currently logged on users
who -a - with more info


MANIPULATING TEXT
-------------------

cat file1 -display the contents of file1.
cat file1 file2 - concatenate both the files and display output
cat file1 file2 > file3 - concatenate both files and save output in file3
cat file >> file4 - append file to file4
cat > file - any subsequent text typed will go into file until ctrd+D is typed
cat >> file - any subsequent text typed will append in file until ctrd+D is typed
tac file - this will print file in reverse order
cat > newfile - this will create newfile, and wait user to add text till ctrd+D is pressed

Example with EOF
cat << EOF > newfile
> hello
> world!!!
> EOF

cat somefile | less - for viewing less of large files
less somefile - same as above
head -15 - display first 15 lines
tail -10 - display last 10 lines
tail -f logfile - to continue monitoring new additions to a growing logfile


SED & AWK
------------

sed - sed -e s/is/are infile.txt - this will change first occurance of is and changes to are 
      sed -e 1,2s/is/are infile.txt - this will change occurances in 1st and 2nd line and changes to are 
      sed -e s/is/are/g infile.txt > outfile.txt - this will change all occurances of is and changes to are and save it in outfile.txt

awk - pls explore on net


SORT & UNIQ
---------------

sort - sort filename - sort file according to characters at beginning of each line.
cat file1 file2 | sort - combine two files, sort and display contents
sort -r filename - sort in reverse order
sort -k 3 filename - sort lines by 3rd field on each line instead of begining
sort -u filename - sort and then check for unique values
sort file1 file2 | uniq > file3 - sort file1, file2 remove duplicate entries and save in file3.
sort -u file1 file2 > file3 - same as above
uniq -c filename - to count no of duplicate enteries


JOIN, SPLIT & PASTE
---------------------

paste - paste -d ':' phone.txt names.txt - this show phonefield:namesfield
join - join file1 file2 - retains comman field and add non comman
split - split filename - split file which contains more than 1000 lines into files with 1000 lines each 


GREP, STRINGS, TR
--------------------

grep pattern filename - searches for pattern and return all matching lines
grep -v pattern filename - prints all lines that do not match the pattern
grep [0-9] filename - print lines containing numbers from 0-9
grep -C 3 pattern filename - print context of lines (specified no. of lines above and below the pattern) for matching the pattern

strings book1.xls | grep my_string - string is used for non-text files

tr - tr abc ABC - converts lower case to upper case
tr '{}' '()' < inputfile > outputfile - changes braces into parenthesis
echo 'this is for testing' | tr [:space:] '\t' - changes white spaces to tab
echo 'this is for testing' | tr -s [:space:] - squeeze repetetion of characters using -s
echo 'this is geek stuff' | tr -d 't'- delete specified character
echo 'my username is 432234' | tr -cd [:digit:] - complement the sets using c option
tr -cd [:print:] < file.txt - remmove all non printable characters from file
tr -s '\n' ' ' < file.txt - join all lines in a single line

tee - ls -l | tee newfile - This will display the newfile and save it as well

wc -l - displays no of lines
wc -c - diplays no of bytes
wc -w - displays no of words

cut - pls search online


NETWORKING
-------------

host linuxfoundation.org - this will show ip addresses of the site
nslookup linuxfoundation.org - this will also show ip addresses of the site
dig linuxfoundation.org - this will also show ip addresses of the site
/sbin/ip addr show - to view ip address
/sbin/ip route show - to view routing info
ping hostnamme - To check remote host is recieving data
ip route - show current routing table
ip route add - add static route
ip route del - delete static route
traceroute - to inspect route the data package take to reach destination


NETWORK TOOLS
---------------

ethtool - queries network interfaces and also set various parameters like speed
netstat - displays all active connections and routing tables, monitoring performance and troubleshooting
nmap - scans open ports on network, important for security analysis
tcpdump - dump network traffic for analysis
iptraf - monitors network traffic in text mode
mtr - combines functionality of ping and traceroute and gives a continuously updated display
dig - tests dns workings, a good replacement for host and nslookup
wget - is a command line tool for downloading files
curl - for getting info about url like source code being used
curl -o saved.html url - to save info into a file


























  