NODE.JS
--------

1. Node.js is a runtime environment for js.
2. Server can be set up for code reference go to their website. 
3. Built in modules can be used for different purposes, you do not need to remember them all, for reference you can search for them on the internet. 
4. There are three kinds of modules. 1. Build in 2. Custom modules (built by you) 3. Third party modules (we can install them with npm)
5. Node REPL - Node works on Read Evaluate Print Loop. Node.Js REPL or Read-Evaluate-Print Loop is an interactive shell for the Node.js environment which means we can write any valid Javascript code in it.
6. In REPL shell _ stores the previous variable. If we type _ then it will return the last variable. 
7. If we print tab twice it will return certain variables which are globally available. You do not need to import them. 
8. We can create node server (V67) by using if else statements, use reference from node.js website. But it is inconvenient.

MODULES
---------

Common JS Modules

You can create module e.g mod.js then you need to export it by calling e.g module.exports = average, and import it by calling const average = require(./mod) then you can directly call this fn. 
If you are exporting more fns then you can create object e.g. module.exports = {avg:average, fac:factorial}. And you can import it by calling const mod = require(./mod). 
Then you can use this by calling mod.average. or you can use destructuring to use it directly like const {avg:average, fac:factorial} = require(./mod) Reference V68.

ES6 Modules

For creating ES6 modules. Directly write export as prefix in the functions in modules file and use import {avg:average, fac:factorial} from "./mod" in the file where it needs to be used. 
If you using export default function then it can be directly imported e.g. import avg from "./mod" i.e without destructuring.V97


NPM 
-----

npm --version or node --version tells the version installed 
npm init will initialize the node package in the folder by creating package,json file and node modules folder.
npm init -y will skip the interactive part and create the package directly.
npm install express will dowload the package and show it in dependencies in package.json file.
npm install slugify@1.3.5 will download the given version.
^1.3.5 means major.minor.patch. ^ means install exact version, ~1.3.5 means install latest version including any new patch. >1.3.5 will install version greater than the given version. 
npm view slugify version will show its installed version. 
npm install nodemon --save-dev. This will make nodemon as dev dependencies & will show as same in package.json. npm i -D can also be used.
npm install nodemon --global. This will make nodemon available globally i.e you can use it in any other projects as well. 
Express is a node.js framework which helps & simplify routing & API's apart from setting up the server. See Express70 folder for more details.
if you write code . and press enter in console it will open the folder in new window. 

PUG 
-----

1. Template engine - we give inputs and engine produces and serves html files based on that. 
2. Things to remember in gym & dance projects is how to take references for express, pug. And how to write html in pug.
3. Template Inheritance-V79- You need to create a file base.pug. Content of this file will be displayed accross entire website. 
   It is a kind of form which needs to filled with help of e.g home.pug, about.pug, contact.pug, & index.pug is the where we created our entire page.
   Some content will be same across website e.g navbar and footer so these will be fixed in base.pug, rest of the details must be filled according to the page 
   home, about or contact.

NODE JS
========

1. If we type _ and press enter then it will print last variable.

2. Double tab prints all global variables available in nodejs.

3. REPL is read evaluate print loop. 

4. Port 80 doesn't require to be written along with local host in url, only local host is required, e.g. 127.0.0.1
   For others it is like 127.0.0.1:7000, where 7000 is the port.

5. Version of packages:
   
   1. 1.3.4 - Major.Minor.Patch

   2. npm i ^1.3.4 - It will install exactly the same package.

   3. npm i ~1.3.4 - It will install latest package.

   4. npm i >1.3.4 - It will install package which is later than the mentioned. 

   5. npm view slugify version - This will show the version of the installed package (e.g.slugify)

6. npm install nodemon --global 
   This will install it as global dependency and can be used in any project.

7. npm install nodemon --save-dev
   This will save it as dev dependency, after project completion it will not be required or used.

8. Running npm init in a folder will initiate the folder as node project & npm will create all relevent files and folders.

9. ../ means go to previous folder.